Greetings everyone. I am incredibly
honored today to be in conversation with
Chris Bash and let me give you a little
sense of his background and then we're
going to be discussing his extraordinary
book LSD and the mind of the universe
which is an incredibly profound book.
Chris is a professor ameritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years.
He was an adjunct faculty at the
California Institute of Indal Studies.
He is a memeritus fellow at the
Institute of Noetic Scientists and on
the advisory board of the Gra Legacy
Training. You're the author of three
books and this book that we're talking
about today, Chris, is truly
transformational.
And I really want to honor apart from
all that you've done, I want to honor
who you've been and your journey, your
courageous journey that you describe in
this book of being on a path of
spiritual awakening and exploring the
cosmos and levels of consciousness.
And what I hope we can get into is how
what you allowed yourself to to
experience and and face in this journey,
spiritual journey, I think is a profound
guide to us in this time of collective
awakening and transformation that we're
in today.
>> So, thank you for being in this
conversation.
>> Um, thank you, Heather. for this very
kind introduction and it's a pleasure to
be here with you truly.
>> Maybe Chris you could start by just
giving us the context of this journey
that you were in and then we'll get into
the deeper layers of what you discovered
as you were in that journey.
>> Well, I just finished graduate school. I
had graduated in philosophy of religion.
I was going through my first Saturn
return. Uh so I that was the beginning
of my teaching career. I met the work of
Ian Stevenson who introduced me to the
to the empirical evidence for
reincarnation
and more importantly I met the work of
Stannis law of Grath in his first book
realms of the human unconscious
and I immediately saw how important if
what he was saying was true how
important his work was for my
disciplined philosophy of religion
and I decided that this was too good to
pass up even though psychedelics had
been made illegal in 1970 and this was
that I just needed to do this work. I
needed to go in the direction that Stan
had gone uh and to do the personal inner
work and the transpersonal inner work uh
if I was going to be able to contribute
something to my discipline philosophy of
religion that would be enduring. So I I
began what became a 20-year journey
working with LSD.
After three medium dose sessions, I did
uh 70 more highdosese LSD sessions. I
worked at 500 to 600 micrograms, which
is kind of the maximum sort of high dose
in a in the protocol that Stan outlines
in realms of the human unconscious. And
then shortly thereafter, LSD
psychotherapy, which is you're working
in a protected environment. You're
working with the sitter. In this case,
it was my wife Carol who was a clinical
psychologist.
uh working uh lying down, headphones,
listening to very carefully curated
playlist, eye shades, totally infocused
inwardly
uh protected from the outside world, no
contact with the outside world, a purely
inwardly focused journey. Uh and so I
went into that work and I wouldn't
recommend people use this same protocol
today. I think I was lucky and and I but
it was an it's an extreme protocol.
Um I worked for four years. I stopped
for six years for reasons that I
described in the book and then I worked
for another very intense 10-year period.
So between when I was 30 years old and
50 years old, I did this 20-year
journey. And then I waited I I processed
all these experiences for another 20
years before I wrote LSD in the mind of
the universe
because it takes a long time when when
you're dealing with such radical states
of consciousness. It takes a long time
to really understand what's going on and
to to to make sense of the patchwork of
experiences to find out what are the
threads and continuities and just to
sort of learn how to talk about uh
something this deep and this intimate.
Um so I did the 20 years of work and
then I waited 20 years and processed it
and then published the story of this
work in LSD in the mind of the universe.
As you reflect on it now, Chris, how do
you see this transforming who you are
and how you are in your life at this
time?
>> You know, it transformed me slower than
I would have liked and slower than I
thought it would in the beginning. uh in
that you know that toward the end of my
journey spirit said to me there's the
dying of seeing and the dying of
keeping. The dying of seeing is
everything you have to do to have clear
and strong uh contact with transcendent
reality in your sessions. The dying of
keeping has to do with integration. Has
to do with how much of that can you
actually hold and stabilize.
And uh I'm still integrating my
sessions. I'm still internalizing uh the
great teachings and the experiences that
were given to me. And so when I finished
my work, when I right after Id finished
that work uh when I was 50 years old and
I'm 76 now, you know, I I had
internalized a lot of the sessions. I
had been carefully judicious in
following protocols for integration,
but I I feel like now I'm much more it
it lives with me much more coherently
and more integrated now.
Um I feel like um
now that I've been able to speak
publicly about these things which is a
major step in integrating because I kind
of had integrated them privately when I
couldn't speak publicly. I couldn't
speak about it to my students. I
couldn't speak about it at the
university because of the illegality.
Uh but when I after I retired and when I
wrote the book
um I was able to speak publicly and I
began to become kind of more coherent,
more integrated within myself between
the person who went into these deep
states and the university professor that
I was as making my living.
I it's kind of interesting. Um
I feel calm, centered. I feel blessed by
having g been given so many intimate
experiences
of the universe of the cosmos, the
layers of the cosmos, the patterns
within the cosmos, the trajectory that
reincarnation is taking humanity. Having
had so many intimate experiences with
the divine, I wish I could live in that
intimacy. And there are some beings who
do, who can. Uh but that's not who I am.
Uh it's a lifelong project to try to
continue to purify myself so that I can
live more comfortably in that ecstatic
intimacy with the divine.
So yeah, it's um it's a work in
progress. Yeah.
>> One of the things you mentioned Chris is
that there was a certain
pattern to your sessions in general and
that you really came to realize that
there is this cycle of purification.
>> Yeah. before moving into an initiation
into a higher level of consciousness and
that that was an ongoing process. Can
you describe that more fully?
>> Sure.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh basically I understand with Stan
Grath I understand LSD and other
psychedelics with different nuances to
be primarily an amplifier of
consciousness. They don't give you an
experience. They amplify your
consciousness and everything else
follows from how you use those hours of
amplified awareness. If you use it and
stay in contact with the world or go to
a concert or talk with friends, it it
produces certain kinds of results. But
if you enter it as in a meditative way
with an internal focus,
um I found that my sessions basically
most frequently broke down into two
halves.
First a purification half.
Uh a often an unpleasant half. Sometimes
it was related to your personal life.
Sometimes it was related to the species
life. Sometimes it wasn't related to
anything that you can identify inside
time and space. But an intense
purification and purggation which if you
handle it well eventually reaches a type
of crescendo
and you go through a death rebirth
process and then the rest of your
session is spent in ecstatic state where
the teaching continues. The the the
blessings of initiation continue and
then slowly eventually you return to
your ordinary state of consciousness.
And when you return, if you really
internalize everything that you were
shown and given carefully, your next
session kind of picks up where your
previous session stops
>> and the cycle repeats itself. So what I
found was that um
when I was looking over all of my
sessions and trying to map them in some
coherent pattern, I found that I could
roughly divide them into about five
different overlapping categories. The
first having to do with my personal
unconscious, my personal mind. Uh and
this eventually is what includes what
Stan Grath would call the perinatal
level of consciousness. Uh the what I
would call the existential level of
consciousness. Then the collective mind,
the mind of the species, the collective
unconscious.
Third, the archetypal mind. And I mean
this more primarily in Plato's sense of
archetype beyond human consciousness
less than than a Yungian sense of
archetype.
And fourth a causal mind or the the mind
of oneness.
And then for me it was the diamond
luminosity the domain of crystallin pure
diamond luminosity what Buddhism calls
dharmarmacaya.
Now what I found was that
uh every time every breaking into every
deeper level of consciousness was
breaking into a clearer level of
consciousness
and a higher level of energy. That every
deeper level of consciousness operates
at a higher level of energy and you have
to acclimate to this energy. You have to
become a being who can live in this
energy for hours at a time. Otherwise,
your experiences there will become
fragmented and you won't have clear
experience. So, you have to truly focus
and acclimate
to stabilized consciousness at this
level. And if you stabilize
consciousness and you keep coming back
to the same approximately the same level
of consciousness, this purification will
continue and you will become cognitively
competent at that level. You will be
able to understand your experiences
completely. Uh you'll begin to
understand how reality functions there.
And if you're using a psychedelic like I
was, it had a lot of power to it.
Eventually, you'll come to a point where
you come to a threshold and it's pushing
you into the next level of
consciousness. And you have to go
through yet another cycle of death and
rebirth in order to let go of everything
you've seen up to that point in time and
to enter into still another level of the
mystery of the reality of of the divine
or the reality of the mind of the
universe. So I I at first I thought and
the Stan describes well the cycle of
death rebirth at the perodatal level of
consciousness and I thought that death
and rebirth would be a one-time thing
because that's how we you know we talk
about the death of the ego and the death
of the self it would be a one-time thing
but what I found was that there are many
turnings of the wheel of death and
rebirth
and so it's a repetitive cycle at
different levels of consciousness
and eventually I came to understand that
death was actually a very intense form
of purification. This is came very late
into the in the work because
once you've died many times you know at
different levels of consciousness
eventually it sinks in that you can't
die.
What you are can die can be shattered.
The form of your life can be shattered.
Everything you know and believe about
reality can be shattered. But always the
phoenix always rises. You always awaken
a transformed person in a deeper level
of reality. So I began to understand
that purification is a a long process, a
deeply
cyclic process. And when purification
reaches particularly deep, when it
begins to purify you of all sorts of
associations for that you have at a
particular level of being, it becomes
purification unto death.
>> Death has returned because death is
basically a measure of the intensity of
how deep the purification is reaching
into life as you had known it up to that
point in time. So this is just an this
is an ongoing repetitive pattern for any
long sustained inquiry of of a series of
initiations
into deeper levels of the universe
and to read your journey through that
Chris I mean it's profound to to face
all these layers of death rebirth
>> to go through all these experiences of
facing the shadow shadow aspects of
yourself, the ego death, but then and I
want to get a little bit more in a
minute into you're also experiencing
purging some of what's in the collective
consciousness or unconscious.
>> It takes a lot of psychological strength
to endure what you endured and
particularly the way in which you were
in this experience that you couldn't
share with others.
>> Yeah. Um, and
you really were pushing the boundaries
of your own psyche and your own
capacity.
And it feels to me like part of what was
really important was how you were
constantly journaling
and keeping a witness self to the
process.
>> Yeah. But that ultimately I sensed at a
certain point in your journey you so
became aware of your infinite soul self.
>> Yeah. that there was a deeper trust in
this process and in whatever would
emerge because you went through a lot of
pain, a lot of suffering is part of the
journey
>> and I really I really had to give a lot
of thought to how much of that suffering
I should let people see because um but
and in the end I decided to share a fair
amount of it because I felt it was
important to understand how this method
of of of cosmological exploration works
and and what the patterns of
purification are just as for other
psychonauts who'd be coming down the
line in the future. You know, it began I
was really inspired by Stan Grath's work
and one of the major things that Stan
gave me in his writing was to trust the
inner healer. to trust that this
experience,
even though it's difficult and even
though it may take you in directions
that you don't understand at the time,
if you submit to it, if you trust it, it
will take you somewhere that eventually
will be healing for you and illuminating
for you. And so it was on the basis of
his prior experience that I just learned
to trust the experience completely.
And then once you begin to experience
this cycle that there's purification,
breakthrough, illumination, and then
coming back and returning that this is a
pattern and you then you have your own
personal experience that these
experiences can be trusted and then as
it takes you deeper and deeper and you
and I always had the experience that my
sessions were being guided by a larger
consciousness, a conscious iousness that
expanded the deeper I entered into it.
It never took a form. It never took a
face. It never had a deity form. It
never took the form of spirit guides
with any discernable form. But it was
always a felt sense of presence. Uh I
always felt that I was with a being or
with being itself in a way that um it
was a very intimate encounter and that I
could absolutely trust this
consciousness completely with my life as
I did over and over. And so you have
your own experience that this
intelligence is so profound and the
compassion is so deep, the wisdom is
just unfathomably deep.
that I just trusted it completely even
when I was losing my mind and even when
I was losing all my reference points
that I just trusted that this was
something worthwhile going through and
it always turned out to be that way. And
so for me the some of the discussion in
some of the psychedelic literature that
you want to avoid a bad trip you know
you you want to just have a good trip
good things that seems to me to be
shortsighted because it it misses the
significance of the purification cycle
for me when a trip when a session I
never use the word trip because that
sort of sounds like a superficial kind
of thing. I use the word assession which
is based actually on the a Japanese term
a sasheen which is a period of
concentrated spiritual practice like a
meditation retreat a sasheen for me each
session was a sasheen a period of
intense practice
um
I'm losing my train of thought there for
a minute but basically when I would go
into this material uh I just trusted it
I let go into it And it I always found
that it took care of me. Uh and being
demolished and being destroyed and being
pulverized is actually a great blessing
because it opens you up to things that
you would never otherwise get to
experience.
That is part of what profoundly moved me
reading the book, Chris, is this
increasing honoring of the surrendering
to whatever you are experiencing,
knowing that you were being guided and
held in this wisdom and love of this
consciousness that is so far beyond our
capacity to comprehend.
>> Yeah.
It did. And I found I should say that I
discovered that I kind of have a
constitution that works well with this
particular work. And not everybody does.
And and certainly not everybody has a
constitution that they should work with
such high doses of a psychedelic. Uh
some people have such a subtle nature
and such a refined nature that they just
need a little bit to open the edges and
they move beautifully into it. But I
constitutionally I mean and it shows up
in my chart I have the capacity to enter
into deep unitive states but I also have
a kind of the inclination that I congeal
well if I hadn't even open smoothly or
congeal smoothly I would maybe have give
been given greater pause but I did come
back smoothly with my memories intact.
Yeah. So
>> yes and there are so many path paths to
spiritual awakening through meditation
through plant medicines through shamanic
journeying.
>> Part of what I think and is so
significant in what you were allowing
yourself to go through Chris is it was a
very intense journey that you were in.
And it does again feel to me like you
really were a pioneer
pushing these boundaries and limits to
explore these different levels of
consciousness
in a way that really is guiding us now
because we are collectively in such a
profound time of transition and
transformation on the planet.
>> Yeah. and and I want to get into your
visions about this transition that we're
in and what it means to move into
becoming the future humans that were
meant to be. But before we get to that,
I also want to just talk about how part
of your journey was not only the purging
of your own
sense of ego, your own shadow, your own
experience of what needed to be healed
or cleared in your personal psyche. But
you actually at times felt in a profound
way that you were doing a a purging for
the collective.
>> Yeah.
>> Can you talk some about that?
>> Yeah. And that was a hard concept to
accept in the in the early years. I
basically I spent about two and a half
years going through what Stan described
so beautifully in his discussion of the
perinatal level of consciousness. I went
through death, rebirth, lived the
existential anxieties, the metaphysical
anxieties and questioning the
fundamental meaningfulness of existence
until eventually the the universe just
shattered my egoic existence turned me
into the exact opposite of everything
I'd ever known myself to be and said,
"So there, you know, what are you going
to do now?"
And what I had expected was at Stan says
once you go through a good solid ego
death your pathway into transcendent
reality gets easier. it opens up. And so
I said, "Good. I'm ready for that." But
what happened in my case is that it
simply started there was a transition
experience and then it started a new
cycle of purification that was much more
intense than anything to do with my
personal death and rebirth. And
systematically for the next two years,
actually for one year, and then I
stopped for that six-year period. And
then it continued on another year and it
started exactly where I had stopped the
end of the first years. But for two
years spread out over eight years of
chronological time. I was systematically
taking in taken into
u
deeper and deeper and wider horizons of
human suffering, of human trauma.
And it just it got darker and darker and
worse and worse until eventually it
stretched for thousands of of years in
depth and it seemed to encompass
the whole of the human species in its
suffering in specific configurations.
And at first I thought, okay, this must
be a kind of another cycle of ego death,
a deepening of ego death. But then
eventually it went on for so long and it
involved so many beings that I I was
forced to draw a a more radical
conclusion and I was reluctant to draw
this conclusion because it felt like it
could be read as ego but it wasn't ego
and I began to understand that something
was using my sessions in order to bring
about a healing or a a cleansing of some
aspect of the collective psyche. So just
as your personal psyche aggregates your
pain and suffering into specific coic
systems, Stan calls them systems of
condensed experience, I came to
understand that the collective psyche
works in the same way that all the
trauma that humanity has experienced
over its lifetimes, all the trauma of
war, of starvation, of violence against
each other, of specific configurations
of violence particularly violence
between men and women so on and so
forth. Anything which is not cleared and
resolved at the end of the lifetime of
the individuals who have these
experience doesn't simply go into the
individual soul which is then
individually resolved in future
lifetimes. It also goes into our
collective soul into our collective
consciousness in these massive
I call them the metacoic seas the the
giant collective aggregates of human
suffering and human joy but human
suffering that are still functioning and
distorting our experience as the species
encumbering our species good judgment
and kindness of heart. And so what I
learned was that if you work with very
large doses, you open up to the
collective field of humanity. And if you
are
cut out for this work, and I believe I
was destined to do this type of work,
then you have an opportunity to take on
some of that suffering through yourself.
You don't want to hold it in yourself,
but if you allowed, if you can
experience it, you can draw that
suffering off of the collective and
transmute it and let it go through you
into um clarified divine consciousness.
So that's what happened. It just it it
went deeper and deeper and deeper and
deeper until eventually at the end of
two years, it reached a a tremendous
crescendo of of an orgy of pain. hard to
describe an an an agony
and I was then when it culminated I was
catapulted into archetypal reality very
powerfully deeply thrown beyond the
entire human species mindfield
and the suffering that particular kind
of suffering stopped. It never resumed
again which left me with a bit of a
puzzle. We know that this human species
mind still holds a lot of suffering. Why
did it end in my sessions when it still
was being held some of it was still held
by the collective psyche? And I I
suggest some possible interpretations in
the book. But one of the things that I
came to think is
at a certain stage of your work you are
useful to the universe by drawing the
pain and suffering out of the human
psyche.
>> Later if you continue to go and you go
deeper into the universe into the
blessings of initiation
you become more useful pouring those
blessings into the human psyche from
above.
So I think something like that was going
on.
>> Yeah.
>> And talk some about that final phase in
your sessions where you experienced more
and more of those blessings and actually
moved into what you call the experiences
of diamond luminosity.
>> Well, between the the collective
suffering, the kind of what I call the
ocean of suffering and the diamond
luminosity, there were kind of two
intermediate phases of the work. One of
them was um archetypal reality and there
was kind of two levels of archetypal
reality kind of a platonic
level of archetype of reality in where I
experienced archetypes but not the way
Plato described them. not unchanging
ideas in the mind of an eternal being,
but as vast living powerful cosmic
energetic forces that were living on a
completely different scale of reality, a
different time zone. It's like comparing
our small solar system with the entire
galaxy. The archetypes were the
galaxies. In fact, that's that's the
closest I could come to even
experiencing them coherently was I saw
them as galaxies. It's just the be the
best my mind could do to give them a
sense of scale. At the lower level of
archetypal reality, I was taken
repeatedly into the collective mind of
humanity. And I didn't experience
archetypes the way Jung describes them.
Wise old man, wise old woman. though I'm
sure that those things are there. It's
just not what I was given to experience.
I experience repeatedly
the human species as a single organism
and I experience I was a given
experiences of how this organism
functioned as a whole amongst all the
differentiation of its parts. So I I g
was given experiences that each one of
our minds is like a cell within the mind
of the species and our individual
problems and successes are reflections
of the problems and successes at the
working within the species as a whole.
So after working in the ocean of
suffering, I kind of went I blasted out
horizontally so that I could sustained
consciousness
at the collective level of reality and
then touching into the the deeper
archetypal level of reality. But then
after about a year and a half, which is
not much time to explore such vast
things, I went through another round of
death and rebirth and I was catapulted
into what I call causal reality or the
reality of of oneness. So at the at the
causal level of reality, the the primary
difference is
everything lives and pulses as one.
You're confronting,
you're living as part of a single
reality. And what stands out in your
experience is the oneness of all life.
Even at the archetypal level, you're
dealing with at subtle level reality,
you're dealing with structures which are
dualistic, complimentary, and they can
be vast, but they there are still
dualism operating.
At causal liver reality all dualism is
subsumed
into the fundamental truth of oneness.
So I that was during a year that I call
the benediction of blessings in the
chapter and it happened to be when
Uranus and Neptune in the sky for
everyone was squaring my lunar nodes. So
Uranus revolutionary change was
facilitating the emergence of Neptune
non-dual experiences in service of the
larger trajectory of my soul's work. And
then after a year and a half or two
years or so of working there, that's
when I then went through yet another
round of intense purification under
death and entered diamond luminosity for
the first time.
And in the last five years of my work
and 26 sessions, so really a third of
all of my sessions
uh is what I
was spent exploring the diamond
luminosity. But I was only taken back
into the most intense form of that
clarity four times in 26 sessions. Four
times. And this is these are what I
consider the diamonds from heaven. the
just the the purest, most crystalline,
most ecstaticinducing,
truth imbued
levels of consciousness, which when I
touched it for the first time, I
completely lost all interest in
exploring any of the other lower levels
of consciousness. This is a a higher
order of reality altogether.
What's so profound is that in that
realm, I'm sure, feels beyond words.
It's so ineffable. It's so beyond space
and time, beyond
any individual experience of it. You're
merged then
>> with the oneness of all that is.
>> Yeah. But I sure did work hard to find
words for it. I mean I I I
really it we may end up in silence but
for me as a writer as a as a psychonaut
I work very hard to find words to some
give some type of concrete expression
for my own sake first for my own sake so
I can remember so I can hold on to it
>> you can integrate it
>> so I can integrate it and and for other
people too who when they touch up touch
these things so they can have some sense
of a map of the landscape uh to
hopefully make it a bit easier for them
to integrate these experiences. And what
I found was when we break into a new
level of reality,
our our mind has a hard time adjusting
to the parameters of this new level. And
we often can't understand, we can't even
remember everything we experience. And
and it has the feeling of being
ineffable. We can't put it in the words.
But I found that if you go back
consistently and with discipline over
and over again to that level of reality,
your cognition improves, perception
becomes clearer, your retention becomes
more complete, and so you do begin to be
able to retain and put words to things
that in the early stages you wouldn't
put words to. Okay. So ineffability
surely when we are dealing with
experiences which are radically beyond
space and time as we know it, radically
transcending the limits of all human
thought and yet
and yet
said like the true writer and
philosopher that you are. Um but part of
what I felt and I think you may have
been explicit about this at points in
the book and we know more and more now
through our understanding through
research from the HeartMath Institute
and that it's through our hearts that we
actually can open to that
sense of unity consciousness that sense
of oneness
>> and then our hearts can entrain our
minds.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So, it feels to me like you had these
incredible
heartopening,
expansive experiences and then work to
translate that
for the mind to be able then to
communicate it and express it.
>> Yeah. I mean, I I study my sessions like
I study a sacred text because these were
experiences given to me by a power
outside of myself.
And on the one hand I accept my personal
responsibility for whatever you know
interaction between my mind and the
universal mind that produced this.
But to me they are the deepest
communication between the universe and
myself that I have had in this lifetime.
So I read those sessions often to
remember, to infuse, to absorb,
uh to incorporate them into my
meditation exercises.
And and this is something I may I should
have mentioned earlier when you
mentioned different forms of spiritual
practice. I really believe that if
you're going to use something like
psychedelics in a spiritually mindful
way and a a deep therapeutic and
cosmological exploration way, it's
really important to have a stable daily
practice or spiritual practice
meditation, yoga, taichiang, something
because these are shortterm temporary
radical swings of consciousness which
stretch you in unimaginable ways.
And the next morning, it's important to
come back to your mat and focus. And to
me, one of the most wonderful times of a
session is my morning meditation after
the session when my mind is much open,
much the clouds have been backed off and
I can sit and practice. But I think it's
important to have a stabilizing daily
practice if you're going to go into
temporary
uh radical states of consciousness.
Yeah.
The other facet of that Chris which you
talk about in the book is that this
whole
the purpose of reincarnation.
>> The purpose of spiritual awakening
is not to exit
and just
uh go into transcendent reality.
>> You call it calling heaven down to
earth. It's about integrating it here in
this reality and in this experience. So
you're going to the mat, you're going to
meditation is how do I now embody this
and live this here?
>> Yeah. And this really gets down to some
basic metaphysical questions. um when we
first began to have experiential access
to transcendent reality, you know, about
a 5,000 years ago in the early
upupanachiotic period and so on so
forth. And we experience this reality of
ecstatic bliss and infinite absorption.
And how could we not think but that we
belong here because it so clearly is
it's home. It's where we come from that
we belong there. and we belong there
more than we belong here. And so all the
religions that came into existence
during the axial age basically at at the
popular level, not all the of the
esoteric masters of each lineage, but at
the popular level they became up and out
religions. The the the whole goal is to
achieve enlightenment and moka escape uh
escape samsara to achieve enlightenment
and then when you die leave and not come
back into this terribly hard world here
or to have be saved so that you when you
die you can go to heaven or into the
pure land or into the garden. And I
understand that that makes sense in
their historical context. But now that
we understand something of the
extraordinary age of the universe and
the breadth of the universe and we
measure it in a yard stick which is one
light year which is 6 million million
miles and we we understand how many
millennia billions of years have been
invested in the careful articulate
articulation
of this unified field into progressively
differentiated reality. ity. It's less
and less satisfying to sort of think
well the goal of enlightenment or the
goal of spiritual practice is just to
wake up when we suddenly wake up to the
consciousness which is the root
consciousness of all reality to wake up
and leave which leaves the question what
is the purpose of spaceime in the first
place now that I think we're really
seeing a revolution on our understanding
so that we're beginning to understand
that to awaken into transcendence is
only the first half of the journey. The
second half of the journey is to bring
that transcendence here into our
physical body and to grow it within our
physical existence so that we literally
can bring heaven to earth. It's not that
we're here to leave for heaven and
escape into heavenly paradise. We want
to truly bring paradise here socially,
psychologically and existentially. So
that as the Buddhists say sometimes,
samsara, cyclic existence is nirvana, is
spiritually realized. that once you
experience the awakening
of nirvana inside physical existence,
there is no longer any temptation of
wanting to go elsewhere. It's here. It's
now. And that if you think in terms of
the next thousand years or the next
10,000 or 100,000 years and we think of
reincarnation as a continuation, a
churning of this process, then we're
going deeper and deeper and bringing
more and more of spirit in our physical
existence, changing the very foundation
of our physical existence. not not just
not just our mind uh and our creativity
and our heart but actually changing the
physical sensations. We have a kind of a
mechanistic model of how eyes work and
how ears work and so on so forth. But I
think at least some of the things that
I've been shown is the more
consciousness suses our person, not only
does it expand our heart and our mind
and open our mind, but it actually opens
our senses. Our senses become infinitely
more refined and capable of infinitely
subtle discriminations
and and and extended so that this future
human that we'll be talking about is a
radically expanded form of humanity
uh of heart, mind and body. It's all
it's all involved.
And so reincarnation,
the old story of reincarnation leads to
an upand-out cosmology. The new story of
reincarnation leads into
a stage in our evolutionary development
where we begin to gather all of our p
all of our former lives. Anything which
is unfinished, we gather. We gather them
in. And what we first have to do, of
course, is heal them. If there's
anything left to heal, we have to finish
unfinished business. We have to heal
them. and take care of them. And as we
do that though, they begin to become
more integrated into a unified
consciousness, the soul. And in one of
my sessions, I had this experience that
I was bringing in my former lives were
coming into me very fast and they were
like wrapping white light around a kite
spool and they reached a point where
they hit critical mass and they fused
into one. And when they fused into one,
there was an explosion of diamond light
out of my chest. And I was catapulted
into a state of consciousness where I
was an individual,
but I was not an individual within any
frame of reference I'd ever known
before.
And this is what I came to call the
diamond soul, the birth of the diamond
soul. And that is, I think,
reincarnation.
Yes, it does lead us on linear
development, becoming more aware, more
sensitive, more kind, uh more
intelligent and so on so forth. But
there comes a time if we expand when we
die to the soul and we contract when
we're born into ego and we expand and we
contract and we just keep this up for
thousands and thousands and thousands of
years. Doesn't it make sense that sooner
or later the whole soul, the unified
consciousness that holds all of our
experience would awaken inside the human
heart, would awaken inside our incarnate
existence. And we would never ever from
that point on be tempted to think of
ourselves as a hundred-year being when
we would know ourselves as a 100,000 and
more being
>> as an infinite being.
>> Infinite being
>> and part of what you're describing and
you you this theme runs through your
book about communion.
>> Yeah. And that then we experience
ourselves as part of that oneness. But
we are a fractal expression of that
>> sea of cosmic consciousness experiencing
itself in this myriad of forms. But then
we remember who we truly are and how
we're a part of that to be in that
celebration and communion.
>> Yeah. And the divine seems to love
diversity.
Oneness doesn't smother diversity. The
divine loves diversity. And yes, what
was it the biologist at Harvard who said
about God? Just, well, God seems to have
an inordinate fondness for beetles
because they're like 5,000 species of
beetles.
Well, you know, the garden has a
thousand different types of flowers.
There are thousand kind of different
qualities that are alive in the human
spirit.
And yet when we awaken, we realize that
all of this diversity is a fractal
embodiment
of a force, a profound, mysterious,
delicious force which is manifesting
itself as time and space and inside time
and space. Toward what end? And here we
have to solve well how can we only can
say toward what end if we are close
enough to the end to envision what the
end is. But what if we're just getting
started? What if at this point in our
young history we are only 2% into the
development that the divine has planned.
So I think the safer way is to think in
terms of processes not in terms of
goals. An enlightenment, an enlightened
being and even an enlightened species,
as noble as that is as an undertaking is
simply a stage that humanity is going
through. We have to think in terms of
processes, more experience, more
refinement, more power. And I mean that
not in any egoic, you know,
uh, power over kind of sense, but the
more we awaken to the to the divine
energy, which we are, to this
extraordinary nucleus of energy, which
is our essential core and is the core of
everything else. There's power in that
core, which we have to learn how to use
and learn how to guide and respect it
and bring it into the world.
But it's empowerment and power with and
for all that is instead of power over.
>> No power over. Yeah. Power and service.
>> I want to get more into your visions of
the future human. But it just to connect
with that and how you describe that
we're at this incredibly profound
threshold point as humanity. Yeah,
>> as as as you may know, my one of my
specialties is the processional cycle
>> and how it correlates with the Hindu
yoga cycle.
>> And not only do we go through these
individual journeys of reincarnation for
our own growth and evolution, but we do
that collectively.
>> Yeah. And part of what has been
fascinating to me and really radically
transformed my sense of human history is
that as the Vadic texts describe with
the Hindu yuga cycle, we've gone through
collectively this journey of ascending
consciousness, descending consciousness,
ascending consciousness, descending
consciousness, being
>> spiral.
>> Yeah. a spiral and being in these higher
states of consciousness and then
forgetting. And we're now at the end of
a 5,000year period, the Kyuga, the
lowest level of consciousness, our time
of forgetting
>> and getting caught in these shadow
aspects of humanity. And so you so
explicitly describe in the book how part
of what we're dealing with now as we're
being called
into this evolutionary leap as humanity
is we have to purge
>> trauma that we've been through as
humanity.
>> We have to remember who we truly are.
But then we're being called into a
radical
shift in our consciousness, in our
embodiment to become the future humans.
And can you say more about what you
>> your vision of that was?
Well, you know, there's a chapter in the
book, The Birth of the Future Human, and
I think it's the most important chapter
in the book because it's about all of
our children and grandchildren and
great-grandchildren throughout the
world. It's it's it's huge in its scope.
And it's for me started in 1991 about 35
years ago when I didn't know anything
really about the ecological crisis or
the pending global crisis. I wasn't
there at all. And I began to be given a
series of visions when I when it was
just finishing up the ocean of
suffering. When I would go into the
ecstatic portion, I would began to be
shown what I call the master plan for
humanity. And I don't mean a master plan
in a patriarchal dictatorial sense. I
just meant the deeper plan, the
evolutionary saga. And for the next
three years, four years, I had a series
of visions poured into me. They were all
consistent with each other and they
brought out different aspects. But
basically the message was this. Humanity
is coming to a radical turning point in
its evolutionary saga. This is a time of
profound spiritual breakthrough. It's
like we have been climbing a mountain
for thousands and thousands of years and
we are about to come to the crest of the
hill and on the other side was a sun
drenched by valley of extraordinary
positive opportunity. I saw that the
creative intelligence wasn't just
working on awakening individuals.
It was one of the hardest things to come
to terms with. It was only interested in
awakening the entire species. That was
its agenda to awaken the entire species
to its true self- nature to its true
divine nature and that there was an
intelligence working in nature working
in history guiding this process. Just as
we teach our children how to do things
when they are children, knowing that
this will be useful for them when
they're adults, this process was guiding
this important developmental
evolutionary process for human beings.
Uh, and I I saw that this was going to
be truly a before and after event. It
was massive. It was that we would mark
history by this transition.
But nowhere did it tell me how it was
going to pull this off. Because when I
looked around me, I didn't see it.
Most of us were walking around in mall
consciousness and hamburger
consciousness, you know,
I just didn't see it happening. Uh and
then at the end of 1995,
now I had a particular experience where
it took me deep into the future and deep
into the depth of the human psyche, the
the species mind. And let me mention
that this was I had already entered into
the diamond luminosity work. I had
entered into the diamond luminosity
twice about a year a year apart. That
seemed to be the you know I'd spend the
intermediate inter intervening sessions
going through intense purifications
before I would be taken to the diamond
luminosity again. We were now coming up
on this next 5-year cycle and I was
expecting hoping I would be taken into
the diamond luminosity again. That's not
what happened. What I was taken into, I
was dissolved into the into the human
species and I was taken into what I call
deep time, not personal deep time, into
the future of the deep time of our
species.
And I began to experience crisis. I
began to experience a profound anxiety
building in the human family. I began to
experience an an unraveling not of my
personal life but an unraveling of our
collective existence. A a a purggation
just just an an absolute heart-wrenching
traumatic loss of control of the species
of the planet as a species and not just
our country but other countries. I
wasn't given a lot of the details. I
wasn't given a timeline. It seemed to be
um something to do with a cascading
series of ecological crises, but I'm
sure there are other variables at play.
It didn't give me the details, but what
it gave me was the profound experience
of loss of control, of dying,
destructuring, and then just when it
seemed like it was at its peak and we
were at the point of it was an
extinction event, the worst of it passed
and we began to pick ourselves up. And
as we began to pick ourselves up, we
discovered that we had been changed by
this crisis. That this crisis had opened
up our heart. It had given birth to a a
latent sense of oneness within the human
heart. Creativity. We we we began to
interact with each other. And there were
our lives were filled with new concepts,
new ways of seeing reality and new
common sense, new social platforms, new
new insights into not only the breath of
the human condition and the commonality
of the human condition, but new insights
into the divine into into a revisioning
of human history.
I was given insights into how this would
happen in the sense that it's my
sessions spent a long time drilling me
with the idea that explaining this is
going to happen faster than anybody
thinks it's going to happen. It's going
to happen faster than anybody thinks.
And it showed me that this is because of
the workings of the collective psyche.
So just a short side step, what it
showed me was that the human species
mind is a field and that all of our
individual
challenges and individual trauma would
be agitating this field and sending this
field into what we might call nonlinear
conditions. Now we know something about
what happens to physical systems when
they are filled with extra energy so
that they move from nonlinear systems to
nonlinear dynamics. When they move to
nonlinear dynamics, small changes can
trigger uh sudden and fast and large
outcomes.
new forms emerge from nature so that out
of hydrogen and oxygen water molecules
emerge where previously there was not
water before. So there's something about
these hyperenergized states that seems
to activate a creativity that reaches up
underneath us and moves us into higher
levels of insight and understanding.
So that the pain of this challenging
time is not separate from the
accelerated outcome of the successful
conclusion of this time. And over the
course of time, I began to sort of
understand that what I was witnessing
for the species paralleled what we
witness in the spiritual development of
individual mystics. Before individual
mystics come to their great breakthrough
of unitive non-dual insight and and in
the heart they go through a dark night
of the soul. a a dark night of extensive
deep purification purifying out of them
all the old attitudes, old beliefs, old
limitations,
anything that keeps them small until
they literally just wake up into the
pre-existing condition of their divine
nature. I began to understand
that this period of history that we are
entering is a dark night of our
collective soul.
We are we are purging and purifying all
the inferior judgments of our smaller
selves made in earlier centuries. All
the things which have kept us at each
other's throats. So the conflict between
religions and the conflict between
classes and the conflicts between color
and and all these things which have kept
us small are basically incarnating
generation by generation incarnating
into our person. And as we solve these
crises in our individual person, we are
also solving them for the collective
species as a whole, I think we are
entering a time of accelerated spiritual
development, which means the first phase
is always an accelerated purification
process. But if we hold still and let
this happen, if we engage this process
with courage and with fortitude and a
willingness to let it change us deeply,
we will as a family, as a human family,
we will come out of this deeply and
profoundly changed. We are literally
giving birth to a new form of human
being. Just like in centuries and
millennia past when suddenly the human
species increased its brain size by 50%.
All right. This is something like that
very very deep restructuring of the
human psyche. It doesn't require a
bigger brain but it does require a
different organization of the human
psyche. I think of it as uh a
rearrangement of the plate tectonics of
the collective psyche. Truly the
collective shikes psyche is going
through a pivot a pivot point and all
human beings born after this collective
pivot takes place will be being born
into a different kind of human being
with higher spiritual potentials, deeper
self-standing,
more access to their core, more access
to their understanding of their deep
relationships in time and more access to
a deep experience of the divine and
we'll be able to download much more
freely from the divine intelligence than
we could previously in our fragmented
state. So the irony is
the fragmentation
is precisely what's keeping us from
solving the problems that need to be
solved. And as we overcome our
fragmentation of all the different sorts
and we become more harmoniously
integrated as a species that opens up
channels that allow us to download
solutions to precisely the problems
which are getting us keeping us all
agitated. The problems of insufficiency
of not enough energy of not enough food.
We can solve those problems but we have
to come together into the a unified
human species. We have to wake up. The
challenge is to wake up before we die.
And I think the form of the human, the
future human, the form, we don't have to
go into science fiction. We don't have
to go into radical conjectures. We just
have to look to our history
nature or the divine has been just
dating the future human for hundreds of
thousands of years. Reincarnation.
Reincarnation. Slow perfection. Slow
perfection. We are just dating the
future human. But we are coming into the
time when gestation is over. Now it's
time to give birth. And as every mother
knows, when the waters break, this is a
day
unlike any other day. Dangerous day,
hard work day, grueling day. But at the
end, there's a new life in the world.
And we are glad that there's a new life
in the world. That's where I think we
are. And it's happening faster than I
thought it was going to be happening. I
thought
>> I thought I would be dead before the
convulsions began. But I think the
convulsions have begun and they're
getting more and more intense. I don't
think it's going to be over soon. I
think this is a multigenerational
transition because we're just in the
overture of this symphony now. But I
think the convulsions have begun.
>> It it is so profound what you're
sharing, Chris. And I don't know that it
will be multigenerations either. I think
it could be more rapid than we even
could comprehend.
>> I mean, as a clinical psychologist, it's
been amazing to me to see how, you know,
when I would work with people in
clearing their trauma and moving into a
more integrated whole self, it would
take years. And now it's happening in
such an accelerated way. And I think we
are in a death rebirth process
collectively.
>> And it is what the Peruvian shamans talk
about in terms of everything turning
upside down to be in this time of
metamorphosis
>> to become homoluminous ones
>> being homoluminous. Yeah. Yeah.
>> So that's what we're capable of. But as
you're saying, we have to honor the
death before the rebirth. We have to
purge and clear in order to open to that
higher consciousness. And
>> and we need to we need to commit
ourselves to uh nonviolence. We need to
commit ourselves to truth. We need to be
courageous. We need to commit ourselves
to inclusive
systems, inclusive so we don't let any
of the children fall out of the
insurance web and we don't let any of
them fall out of the social network. We
we we have to sort of truly internalize
the understanding that we are all in
this together.
What we do to one we do to everyone. And
so out of that oneness, out of that
socially activated
uh compassion, oneness, great things,
great things can happen. And I hope
you're right. I hope it is sudden and
more sudden than I even imagine.
>> Well, you just did a beautiful
description of what it means to move
into the Aquarian age, which is what
we're being called into.
>> And my dear friend Elizabeth Stores,
evolution biologist,
>> Yeah. would talk about how when it a
species is in crisis, it's no longer
about incremental evolutionary change.
It's about a radical evolutionary leap.
>> And that's where we are as humanity.
>> Yeah,
>> I think so.
>> Is there anything else you'd like to
share before we close? Because I would
love to close with a quote from the
book.
>> Yeah.
>> About this time.
>> Okay.
Well,
I think
just as happens on the mystics of all
traditions when they are seeking the
divine and just as happens in a
psychedelic session when we are seeking
greater truth,
we can trust completely. We can trust
the process that we are in. If we don't
understand that we are just dating the
future human. We're giving birth to the
future human when hard times hit. It's a
real terrible temptation to collapse
into into
helplessness and despair and thinking
that we're being punished or that it's
all amounts to nothing. Uh and of course
our scientific reductive materialism
tells us that it's all chance. There
isn't any meaning in it all. and and
when your brain dies, you disappear. And
so it is for nothing. But that's really
an old way of thinking. And if we
understand that all of our labor is
giving birth to something for our
children and our children's children and
ultimately for us because we will be our
children's children, you know, uh then
we have the hope then we have the hope
of being able to uh keep our head above
water as we move into deeper and deeper
water.
Beautifully said, Chris and I think part
of what you're also describing is the
importance too of of as you did in your
journey trusting that we're held in this
love and wisdom cosmos. And the deeper I
go in my understanding of the movement
of the stars and planets and the
energies of the earth, the more I feel
and know that divine intelligence
that's guiding all that is. And we are
held in that if we honor it and trust
it. And then we can be like the
caterpillar that goes into the chrysalis
and completely dissolves and
deconstructs.
>> Yeah. to become the butterfly. So we
have to trust that liinal journey of
death to be rebirthed in this radically
new way as the new humans.
>> And if we die along the way, don't
worry. Death is not an endangerment.
Death is not death is not termination.
It's simply part of the cycle of living.
You know, it's like it's okay.
>> We are soul selves having a human
experience. Yes, we are. Yeah.
>> Well, thank you, Chris. This this is
truly profound. And I want to close with
a quote from your book that moved me to
tears. And it is about this time that
we're in. And this is what you write. We
will realize our destiny.
The historical crisis that we are
entering is the labor that will give
birth to the being that has been
justating inside of us for countless
generations.
The diamond soul will be born in
history.
We will awaken and when we do, we will
see the universe for who she truly is.
She is the body of God, the great
mother, the diamond maker. With this,
everything begins a new.
>> Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you, Heather. Thank you
for this wonderful conversation. I
really enjoyed it and I enjoy I really
value you connecting me to your
community. It's a true honor.
You know, it's been an honor to be in
this conversation with you. Thank you
for your courage for being on this path
and being a guide to us in this time.
>> And thank you to this community for
>> being in this process of supporting each
other in this journey of transition and
transformation.
>> Yeah.
>> Blessings and love to all of you.
>> Love and blessings.
>> Thank you.